# eleventypub

This is an [11ty](https://11ty.io) project template, configured to build an [EPUB 3](https://w3c.github.io/publ-epub-revision/epub32/spec/epub-spec.html) fileset. It also validates with [EPUBCheck](https://github.com/w3c/epubcheck) and run accessibility checks with [Ace](https://daisy.github.io/ace).

## Quickstart
Clone this repo and start editing:

    $ git clone https://github.com/marisademeglio/eleventypub.git
    $ cd eleventypub
    $ npm install

### Edit your files
All the files you will be editing are in the `src` directory.

1. Create your EPUB's pages as markdown files in `src/pages`.
2. Create a cover page and save as `src/cover.md`.
3. Edit the metadata in `_data/metadata.json`.
4. List the pages in order in `src/pub.json` by listing the file slugs, e.g. 

```
"readingOrder": [
    "intro", "chapter1", "end"
  ]
```

### Build your EPUB
In the terminal:

    $ npm run all

The following output is created:

1. `build/epub`: the expanded EPUB fileset
2. `build/<title>.epub`: the EPUB file itself
3. `build/report`: an [Ace](https://daisy.github.io/ace) report about accessibility

You will see any [EPUBCheck](https://github.com/w3c/epubcheck) validation issues in the terminal.

## Conventions

This part assumes you are familiar with [11ty](https://11ty.io). It discusses project structure and options.

You have as much freedom as you have with 11ty to mix and match templates and options. It's up to you to make sure the files pass EPUB 3 validation.

This project uses the following fileset conventions:

### `src/pages/`
Chapter files live in this directory.

In the pages-wide configuration file, `pages.json`, it says, among other things:

    `tags: pages`

Don't change this.

### `src/index.md`
This becomes the package document. Don't touch this file.

### `src/toc.md`
Table of contents. The filename isn't special, just reference it correctly from `pub.json` and use a TOC template (in this case, `toc.njk`).

### `src/cover.md`
Cover. The filename isn't special, just reference it correctly from `pub.json`.

### `src/_data/`
This data ends up in the package document.
  - `metadata.json`: as many `dc` terms, `properties`, and `links` as you want. Use arrays for metadata properties that should appear more than once, e.g. 
  ```
  "schema:accessibilityFeature": ["alternativeText", "readingOrder"]
  ```
  will create this in `package.opf`:
  ```
  <meta property="schema:accessibilityFeature">alternativeText</meta>
  <meta property="schema:accessibilityFeature">readingOrder</meta>      
  ```
  - `pub.json`: Says which files are the `toc` and `cover`, and lists the `readingOrder`

### `src/resources/`
This directory is for fonts, CSS, images, etc; basically, anything you want listed in the manifest and copied over.

### `_includes`
These are all the layout templates, which create XHTML, OPF, and navigation documents. You can edit and replace these with your own, using any markup syntax supported by [11ty](https://11ty.io). If you use your own templates, it's up to you to make sure you're producing valid EPUB 3 output.

## Scripts

    $ npm run [something from the list below]

- `all`: build, prettify, validate+save, and check accessibility
- `all-no-stylelint`: same as the above, but without running stylelint on the CSS

You may want to run just a single step of the larger process, for which you can use these commands:

- `build`: create the EPUB fileset
- `epubcheck`: run EPUBCheck on the output
- `save`: run EPUBCheck and if valid, save an EPUB file
- `ace`: run the Ace accessibility checker. The report will be in `build/report`

    
## FAQ

### Can I use other formats for my templates?

Yes absolutely! You can do whatever's possible with [11ty](https://11ty.io), which is a lot.

The templates in this project are nunjucks and markdown. The configuration I use for markdown includes having it [output XHTML](https://github.com/marisademeglio/eleventypub/blob/5af185071780aa650ea79939b671177e1db3591f/.eleventy.js#L22). Then, in the `postbuild` step, all `html` files are [renamed to `xhtml`](https://github.com/marisademeglio/eleventypub/blob/5af185071780aa650ea79939b671177e1db3591f/postbuild.js#L16). Even so, there are surely still ways to produce EPUB-invalid XHTML with this setup.

So, whatever you try, it's up to you to make sure that your output is valid.

### What are the TOC options?

Reference your TOC file from `pub.json`. Use the name of the output file, e.g. `toc/index.html`, not the source `toc.md`.

In this basic example, the TOC is the file generated by [`src/toc.md`](https://github.com/marisademeglio/eleventypub/blob/master/src/toc.md). Because it is set to autogenerate, the file is intentionally empty after the front matter data.

If I wanted to write a TOC manually, I would write something like:

```
---
layout: toc.njk
title: Table of contents
EPUBRoot: ".."
auto: false
---
1. [Introduction]({{EPUBRoot}}/pages/intro/index.html)
1. [Chapter 1]({{EPUBRoot}}/pages/chapter1/index.html)
1. [The end]({{EPUBRoot}}/pages/end/index.html)
```

`auto: true` the TOC will be autogenerated. Each chapter file will get an entry with its title (I never said we were fancy).

`auto: false`: you provide everything that's going to go between `<nav>` and `</nav>` in your TOC file. It's up to you to make sure these contents are EPUB 3 compliant (e.g. a valid XHTML ordered list).

If you're providing your own TOC, triple-check the file references to make sure the relative path is correct (use `EPUBRoot` to help). Also, make sure you point to `xhtml` files, as that's what they'll be in the end, as a result of our `postbuild` step.

### What are the reading order options?

You can add a `readingOrder` in `pub.json`. It's an array of [fileSlugs](https://www.11ty.io/docs/data/#fileslug) of the files in order. If `readingOrder` is not specified, a reading order gets generated automatically in alphabetical order based on what's in `pages/`.

All file slugs in a custom reading order have to be for files in `pages/`.

